.\" debsecan - Debian Security Analyzer
.\" Copyright (C) 2005, 2007 Florian Weimer
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301 USA
.\"
.TH DEBSECAN 1 2005-12-23 "" ""
.SH NAME
debsecan \- Debian Security Analyzer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B debsecan
.I options...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B debsecan
analyzes the list of installed packages on the current host and
reports vulnerabilities found on the system.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --suite \fIcount\fP
Choose a specific suite.
.B debsecan
produces more informative output (including obsolete packages) if the
correct suite is specified.  The release code name has to be used
("sid"), not the temporal name ("unstable").
.TP
.B --whitelist \fIfile\fP
Change the name of the whitelist file.
.TP
.BR --add-whitelist ", " --remove-whitelist ", " --show-whitelist
Add or remove entries from the whitelist, or print the whitelist to
standard output.  See the
.SM "CHANGING THE WHITELIST"
section below.
.TP
.B --source \fIurl\fP
Override the default download URL for vulnerability data.
.TP
.B --status \fIfile\fP
Evaluate a different
.B dpkg
status file.
.TP
.B --format \fIformat\fP
Change the output format.  If
.I format
is
.B summary
(the default), a short summary for each vulnerability is printed.
The
.B simple
format is like the
.B summary
format, except that only the bug packages names are printed.  For
.B bugs
and
.BR packages ,
.B debsecan
lists the names of vulnerabilities and binary packages, respectively.
.B --format detail
requests a verbose output format, showing all available data.
The
.B report
format is used for email reports.
.TP
.B --line-length \fIcharacters\fP
Specifies the line length in report mode.  The default is 72.
.TP
.B --mailto \fImailbox\fP
The
.B --mailto
option instructions
.B debsecan
to the send the report to the email address
.IR mailbox .
No report is sent if there where no changes since the last invocation
with
.BR --update-history .
This option requires the
.B --format report
output format.  The option value may contain macros, see the section
.SM CONFIGURATION FILE MACROS
below.
.TP
.B --only-fixed
Only list vulnerabilities for which a fix is available in the archive.
Note that it can happen that a fix is listed, although the package has
not been built for the system's architecture and is not yet available
for download.  (If you use this option, you also must specify the
correct suite using
.BR --suite .)
.TP
.B --no-obsolete
Do not list any obsolete packages (see below).  Using this option is
not recommended because it hides real vulnerabilities on some systems,
not just false positives.
.TP
.B --history \fIfile\fP
Change the name of the history file used by
.BR "--format report" .
.TP
.B --disable-https-check
Turn off certificate validation for HTTPS.
.TP
.B --update-history
Update the vulnerability status information after reporting it using
.BR "--format report" .
.TP
.B --cron
Internal option used for invocations from
.BR cron .
Checks if the vulnerability data has already been downloaded today.
In this case, further processing is skipped.  See
.BR debsecan-create-cron (8)
for instructions how to create a suitable cron entry.
.TP
.B --config \fIfile\fP
Sets the location of the configuration file.
.TP
.B --help
Display a short help message and exit.
.TP
.B --version
Display version information and exit.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
The configuration file contains the following variables.  It follows
.IR name = value
shell syntax.  If
.I value
contains white space, it must be surrounded by double quotes.
Some variables may contain macros; see the section
.SM "CONFIGURATION FILE MACROS"
below.
.TP
.B MAILTO
Sets the email address to which reports are sent in
.B --cron
mode.  May contain macros.
.TP
.B REPORT
Controls whether
.B debsecan
does any processing whatsoever in
.B --cron
mode.
(Permitted values:
.B true
and
.BR false .)
.TP
.B SOURCE
Controls the URL from which vulnerability information is fetched.
If empty, the built-in default is used.
.TP
.B SUITE
Sets the default value of the
.B --suite
option (see there).
.TP
.B SUBJECT
Changes the subject line of reports.  May contain macros.
.TP
.B DISABLE_HTTPS_CHECK
Disables HTTPS certificate checking, just like the
.B --disable-https-check
command line option.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE MACROS"
Macro processing replaces strings of the form
.BI %s( key )s
with system-dependent values.  Support keys are:
.TP
.B hostname
The host name on which
.B debsecan
runs, without the domain name part.
.TP
.B fqdn
The fully-qualified domain name of the host on which
.B debsecan
runs.
.TP
.B ip
The IP address of the host on which
.B debsecan
runs.  This may be inaccurate on multi-homed systems.
.SH "CHANGING THE WHITELIST"
You can use the
.B --add-whitelist
and
.B --remove-whitelist
options to change the whitelist.  Whitelisted vulnerabilities are not
included in the reports.  For example,
.IP
.B debsecan --add-whitelist CVE-2005-4601
.PP
ignores the vulnerability CVE-2005-4601 completely, while
.IP
.B debsecan --add-whitelist CVE-2005-4601 perlmagick
.PP
ignores it only as far as the perlmagick is concerned.  (This is the
same format that is produced by the
.B --format simple
option.)  To remove all whitelist entries for the CVE-2005-4601
vulnerability, use:
.IP
.B debsecan --remove-whitelist CVE-2005-4601
.PP
If you want to remove an entry for a specific vulnerability/package
pair, list the package name explicitly, as in:
.IP
.B debsecan --remove-whitelist CVE-2005-4601 imagemagick
.PP
You can list multiple vulnerability and packages.  For example,
.IP
.PD 0
.B debsecan --add-whitelist CVE-2005-4601 \e
.IP "" 1in
.B CVE-2006-0082 imagemagick perlmagick
.PD
.PP
whitelists CVE-2005-4601 for all packages, and CVE-2006-0082 for the
imagemagick and perlmagick packages only.
.SH "CAVEATS"
Much like the official Debian security advisories,
.BR debsecan 's
vulnerability tracking is mostly based on source packages.  This can
be confusing because tools like
.B dpkg
only display binary package names.  Therefore,
.B debsecan
displays the more familiar binary package names.  This has the
unfortunate effect that all binary packages (including packages
containing only documentation, for example) are flagged as vulnerable,
and not only those packages which actually contain the vulnerable
code.
.P
If
the correct
.B --suite
option is specified,
.B debsecan
may mark some packages as
.BR obsolete .
This means that the binary package in question has been removed from
the archive.  In this case, you need to update all the packages
depending on the obsolete package, and subsequently remove the
obsolete package.
.P
For certain architectures, build daemons may lag considerably.  In
such case,
.B debsecan
may incorrectly mark a package as fixed, even if an update is not yet
available in the Debian archive.
.P
Note that
.B debsecan
version uses the
.B --suite
option only to determine the availability of corrected packages and to
detect obsolete packages.  If you specify the wrong suite, only the
information on available security updates and obsolete packages is
wrong, but the list of vulnerabilities is correct.
.P
Mixing packages from different Debian
releases is supported, as long as the packages still carry their
official version numbers.  Unknown package versions (from backported
packages, for example) are compared to the version in Debian unstable
only, which may lead to incorrect reports.
.SH EXAMPLES
This command prints all package names for which security fixes are
available:
.IP
.B debsecan --suite
.I suite
.B --format packages --only-fixed
.PP
If you pass this output to
.BR apt-get ,
you can download new packages which contain security fixes.  For example,
if you are running sid:
.IP
.PD 0
.B apt-get install \e
.IP "" 1in
.B $(debsecan --suite sid --format packages --only-fixed)
.PD
.PP
The following command can be invoked periodically, to get
notifications of new security issues:
.IP
.PD 0
.B debsecan --suite
.I suite
.B --format report \e
.IP "" 1in
.B --update-history --mailto root
.PD
.PP
See
.BR debsecan-create-cron (8)
for a tool which creates a suitable cron entry.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B https_proxy
This environment variable instructs
.B debsecan
to use a proxy server to fetch the vulnerability data.  It must be of
the form
.B http://proxy.example.net:8080/
(mimicking a URL).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/default/debsecan
Built-in location of the configuration file.
.TP
.I /var/lib/dpkg/status
File from which the package information is fetched by default.
.SH AUTHOR
.B debsecan
was written by Florian Weimer.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dpkg "(1),"
.BR debsecan-create-cron "(8),"
.BR apt-get "(8)"
